Add a guide on recording and playing back data (#128)
NUbots/NUbook: src/book/03-guides/01-main-codebase/03-recording-playback.mdx

---
section: Guides
chapter: Main Codebase
title: Recording and Playback
description: Recording data and playing it back.

> slug: /guides/main/recording-playback

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: /guides/main/data-recording-playback
```

---

NUbots data is stored in [NUClear Binary Stream (NBS) files](/system/foundations/nuclear#nbs-files). Any [messages](https://github.com/NUbots/NUbots/tree/master/shared/message) that are passed around the NUbots system can be recorded.

## Recording Data

The following steps detail how to record data. An example will be given throughout involving recording sensors messages.

> 1. Set up the role. Most of the time this involves making minor changes to an existing role.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Set up the [role](https://nubook.netlify.app/system/foundations/nuclear#nuclear-roles). Most of the time this involves making minor changes to an existing role.
```

   1. The role must contain the module/s which emit the message/s you want to record.
   2. The role must contain the module `support::logging::DataLogging`.

>    For example, you may want to record [Sensors](https://github.com/NUbots/NUbots/blob/master/shared/message/input/Sensors.proto) messages. You could use the existing [sensortest](https://github.com/NUbots/NUbots/blob/master/roles/sensortest.role) role and add `support::logging::DataLogging` to it.

Reviewer 2: Is this added to the configuration file (i.e. step 2)?

> 2. Set up the configuration file. This involves making changes to the `DataLogging.yaml` file. Add in the message you want to log, specifying `true`.

Reviewer 2: Where can this be found?

> 2. Set up the configuration file. This involves making changes to the `DataLogging.yaml` file. Add in the message you want to log, specifying `true`.

Reviewer 2: Where can this be found?

> 2. Set up the configuration file. This involves making changes to the `DataLogging.yaml` file. Add in the message you want to log, specifying `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Set up the configuration file. This involves making changes to the [`DataLogging.yaml`](https://github.com/NUbots/NUbots/tree/master/module/support/logging/DataLogging/data/config/webotsrobocup) file. Add in the message you want to log, specifying `true`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
2. Set up the configuration file. This involves making changes to the [`DataLogging.yaml`](https://github.com/NUbots/NUbots/tree/master/module/support/logging/DataLogging/data/config) file. Add in the message you want to log, specifying `true`.
```
rather than the webotsrobocup role specific folder

>    In this example, the sensors message already exists in the file (`message.input.Sensors`). Set the boolean to `true` next to this message.

Reviewer 2: Where can this be found?

   If you would like to log a different message:

>    1. Find the `.proto` file that defines that message, such as `Sensors.proto`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Find the `.proto` file that defines that message, such as [`Sensors.proto`](https://github.com/NUbots/NUbots/blob/master/shared/message/input/Sensors.proto).
```

   2. Find what the `package` is. For `Sensor.proto`, it is `package message.input`.
   3. Piece this together with the message name (`message Sensors` in the `.proto` file) to get `message.input.Sensors`
   4. Add this to the configuration file with the other messages.

   You can enable multiple messages at once.

3. Build the code and install it to a robot. To find out how to do this, visit the [Getting Started](/guides/nubots/getting-started) page.

4. Run the binary. In our example, this would be `./sensortest`.

5. Stop the binary when you have finished recording by pressing <kbd>CTRL</kbd> + <kbd>c</kbd>.

6. Move the newly created NBS file to a computer for safe storage.
   1. The NBS file will be located on the robot in the `log/role_name/` folder. The name will correspond to the time and date it was created, according to the robot's clock. Make note of the name. In our example, this may be `log/sensortest/18072020T082100.nbs`.

>    2. Copy the file across. On the destination computer, run `scp nubots@<address>:log/role_name/file_name path/to/destination`. In our example, we may want to run `scp nubots@<address>:log/sensortest/18072020T082100.nbs .`. The file will then be copied to the folder you ran the command in. `<address>` corresponds to the address of the robot.

Reviewer 2: It could be helpful for us poor windows peasants to have descriptions of what the commands are and what they are doing. Or are we assuming that by this point, people have a bit of a grasp of the command line?

## Extracting Data

The NBS file is not easily understood by humans. Certain tools in the NUbots codebase convert NBS files to file formats that are easier for us to understand.

The tools are run with the **b** script in the NUbots codebase. [NBS tools](https://github.com/NUbots/NUbots/tree/master/tools/nbs) have the argument `nbs`.

Tools are executed by running

```sh
./b nbs <tool_name> <nbs_file_name> <arguments>
```

### Stats

Decodes an NBS file into a series of file statistics.

| Argument            | Definition                                                        |
| ------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | --message-timestamp | Uses the message's `.timestamp` field as the time of the message. |

Reviewer: I'd recommend making the arguments inline code blocks, same with the arguments for the rest of the tools on this page.

```suggestion
| `--message-timestamp` | Uses the message's `.timestamp` field as the time of the message. |
```

### JSON

Outputs the data in the NBS file to a JSON file. It is useful to redirect the output to a file by appending `> file.json` to the command.

### Extract Images

Decodes an NBS file and extracts any compressed jpeg files into jpeg files.

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```sh
# Example
./b nbs extract_images path/to/file.nbs --output path/to/output-folder/
```

````

| Argument | Definition                                  | Default                       |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| --output | Specifies the folder to save the images to. | The current working directory |

### Video

> This will take images in an NBS file and create a video.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extracts images from `CompressedImage` messages in an NBS file, and combines them into an MP4 video.
```

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```sh
# Example
./b nbs video path/to/file.nbs --output path/to/output-folder/
```

````

| Argument  | Definition                                            | Default                       |
| --------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| --output  | Specifies the folder to save the video to.            | The current working directory |
| --quality | Specifies the quality to save the video in.           | 30M                           |
| --encoder | specifies the encoder to use when encoding the video. | h264_nvenc                    |

### Calibrate Cameras

> Calculate camera intrinsics using an NBS recording of asymmetric circles grid patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calculates camera intrinsics using an NBS recording of asymmetric circles grid patterns.
```

| Argument        | Definition                                                           | Default  |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
| --config        | The path to the directory containing the camera configuration files. | Required |
| --rows          | The number of rows in the asymmetric circles grid.                   | 4        |
| --cols          | The number of columns in the asymmetric circles grid.                | 11       |

> | --grid_size     | The distance between rows/cols in the grid in meters.                | 0.04     |

Reviewer: It's weird that this uses an underscore when the two below use hyphens. ¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Author: True 🤔

> | -- no-intrisics | Does not change the intrinsic configuration values.                  | -        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| --no-intrisics | Does not change the intrinsic configuration values.                  | -        |
```

| --no-extrinsics | Does not change the extrinsic configuration values.                  | -        |

### Foot Down

Trains a foot down network using sensor data from the legs.

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

```sh
# Example
./b nbs footdown path/to/data-folder/
```

````

## Playing Back Data

> Messages can be emitted from an NBS file. After recording data in an NBS file, you can play it back to the system. Following on from the previous example, lets now run `sensortest.role` with recorded sensor data to analyse the results more closely off the robot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Messages recorded to an NBS file can be played back to the system. When an NBS file is played back, the messages in it are emitted into the system at the same (relative) times they were recorded.

Following on from the previous example, lets now run `sensortest.role` with recorded sensor data to analyse the results more closely without using the robot.
```

> 1. Remove any modules that emit the message you recorded. In this example, remove the Sensors message. That is, remove `platform::darwin::SensorFilter` from the role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Remove any modules that emit the message you recorded. In this example, remove the SensorFilter module, since it emits `Sensors`. To do so, remove `platform::darwin::SensorFilter` from the role.
```

2. Add `support::logging::DataPlayback` to the role.
3. Add in the path to the NBS file in `DataPlayback.yaml`. If the file is in the `recordings` directory, then just add in the file name.
4. Add in the messages you are playing back in `DataPlayback.yaml`, in the same way it was done in `DataLogging.yaml`. In the example, change `message.input.Sensors` to `true`.

> 5. Recompile and run the role you are playing back the data with. In the example, rerun `./b configure` and `./b build`. Run `./b run sensortest` to locally run the role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Recompile and run the role you are playing back the data with. In the example, rerun `./b configure` and `./b build`, then run `./b run sensortest` to locally run the role.
```

> 6. For this example, it makes sense to view the robot in NUsight. Find out how to set up NUsight on the [NUbook Getting Started page](https://nubook.nubots.net/guides/main/getting-started#get-build-and-run-nusight).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. For this example, it makes sense to view the robot in NUsight. Find out how to set up NUsight on the [NUbook Getting Started page](/guides/main/getting-started#get-build-and-run-nusight).
```

> Playing back recorded data is useful when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Playing back recorded data is useful when:
```

- Working remotely, where the data is previously recorded or recorded by another team member
- Testing a system with the same input data
- Not wanting to run the real robot continuously, where it is possible to use the same data

> - Viewing the Visual Mesh in NUsight, due to bandwidth issues in sending it over the network

Reviewer 2: This is a nice touch!

Reviewer: Indeed 👍

Author: 😄
